DOC, MAINT: Centralize and expand development-related docs (#2734)
intel/scikit-learn-intelex: doc/sources/building-from-source.rst

.. distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
.. WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
.. See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
.. limitations under the License.
.. include:: substitutions.rst

====================
Building from Source
====================

Components
----------

The |sklearnex| as a library works mostly as a frontend to the |onedal| by leveraging it as a backend for |sklearn| calls. In order to build the |sklearnex|, it's necessary to have a version of the |onedal| as a shared library already built somewhere along with its headers - for example, by using the Python packages ``dal`` + ``dal-devel`` (conda) / ``daal`` + ``daal-devel`` (PyPI), or the system-wide `offline installer <https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/tools/oneapi/onedal-download.html>`__, or by `building oneDAL from source <https://github.com/uxlfoundation/oneDAL/blob/main/INSTALL.md>`__.

.. note:: Python packages ``dal`` (conda) and ``daal`` (PyPI) provide the same components, but due to naming availability in these repositories, they are distributed under different names.

> As a library, the |sklearnex| consists of a Python codebase with Python extension modules written in C++ and Cython, with some of those modules being optional. These extension modules require compilation before being used, for which a C++ compiler along other dependencies are required. In the case of GPU-related modules, a SYCL compiler (such as `Intel's DPC++ <https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/tools/oneapi/dpc-compiler.html>`__) is required, and in the case of distributed mode, whether on CPU or on GPU, an `MPI <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Message_Passing_Interface>`__ backend is required, such as `Intel's MPI <https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/tools/oneapi/mpi-library.html>`__.

Author: I believe "a C++ compiler **along other dependencies**" would require plural verb here.

> As a library, the |sklearnex| consists of a Python codebase with Python extension modules written in C++ and Cython, with some of those modules being optional. These extension modules require compilation before being used, for which a C++ compiler along with other dependencies is required. In the case of GPU-related modules, a SYCL compiler (such as `Intel's DPC++ <https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/tools/oneapi/dpc-compiler.html>`__) is required, and in the case of distributed mode, whether on CPU or on GPU, an `MPI <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Message_Passing_Interface>`__ backend is required, such as `Intel's MPI <https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/tools/oneapi/mpi-library.html>`__.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a library, the |sklearnex| consists of a Python codebase with Python extension modules written in C++ and Cython, with some of those modules being optional. These extension modules require compilation before being used, for which a C++ compiler along with other dependencies is required. In the case of GPU-related modules, a SYCL compiler (such as `Intel's DPC++ <https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/tools/oneapi/dpc-compiler.html>`__) is required, and in the case of distributed mode, whether on CPU or on GPU, an `MPI <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Message_Passing_Interface>`__ backend is required, such as `Intel MPI <https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/tools/oneapi/mpi-library.html>`__.
```

- ``_onedal_py_host``: this module provides PyBind11-generated bindings over the oneAPI interface of the |onedal| for CPU (host). This module is mandatory.
- ``_onedal_py_dpc``: this module provides PyBind11-generated bindings over the oneAPI interface of the |onedal| for GPU (DPC++). This module is optional, and requires a SYCL compiler. If the oneDAL backend is compiled from source, it must also have been built with its DPC++ component in order to build this module. See :doc:`oneapi-gpu` for more information.
- ``_onedal_py_spmd`` (Linux*-only): this module provides PyBind11-generated bindings over SPMD implementations (distributed mode on GPU) using the oneAPI interface of the |onedal| - see :doc:`distributed-mode` for details. This module is optional, and requires both a SYCL compiler and an MPI backend, along with its headers. It requires the ``_onedal_py_dpc`` module to also be built.

**Note that all of the optional components are built by default** (see rest of this page for how to enable or disable specific components).

Build Requirements
------------------

> In order to build the library from source, a file `dependencies-dev <https://github.com/uxlfoundation/scikit-learn-intelex/blob/main/dependencies-dev>`__ with locked versions of mandatory dependencies is created for usage in CI jobs. Note however that this file does not contain the necessary dependencies for distributed mode, nor does it contain compiler-related dependencies, and it is not strongly necessary to install the exact same versions as in that file for local development purposes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The |sklearnex| `dependencies-dev <https://github.com/uxlfoundation/scikit-learn-intelex/blob/main/dependencies-dev>`__ provides versioned mandatory dependencies for building from source and usage in CI jobs. Note however that this file does not contain all of the necessary dependencies for distributed mode, nor does it contain compiler-related dependencies, and it is not strongly necessary to install the exact same versions as in that file for local development purposes.
```

Python dependencies
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To install the necessary Python dependencies:

- Using ``conda``:

.. code-block:: bash

    conda install -c conda-forge numpy cython jinja2 pybind11 "setuptools<=79"

- Using ``pip``:

.. code-block:: bash

>     pip install numpy cython jinja2 pybind11 "setuptools<=79"

Reviewer: might make sense to also show just `pip install -r dependencies-dev`

Author: But those are locked dependencies. These instructions would also work in edge cases like newly released python versions, other architectures, and similar.

> .. hint:: Using the compiled library after building it has a different set of requirements, such as the |sklearn| package along with its dependencies. Executing the tests also adds additional dependencies such as ``pytest``.

Reviewer: Worth referencing requirements-test.txt?

        source /opt/intel/oneapi/setvars.sh

- Otherwise, the variable can be set manually. For example, if installing some MPI other than IMPI through ``conda``, assuming a Linux* system:

    .. code-block:: bash

        export MPIROOT="$CONDA_PREFIX"

.. _build_script:

Build using ``setup.py``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

With all of the necessary requirements and environment variables already set up, the library can be installed from source as follows:

.. code-block:: bash

    python setup.py install

.. hint:: See the rest of this document for build-time options, such as disabling distributed mode or disabling GPU mode.

To install it in development mode:

.. code-block:: bash

    python setup.py develop

To build the extensions in-place without installing (recommended for local development):

.. code-block:: bash

    python setup.py build_ext --inplace --force # builds daal4py
    python setup.py build # builds onedal extension modules

.. hint:: If building the library in-place without installing, it's then necessary to set environment variable ``$PYTHONPATH`` to point to the root of the repository in order to ble able to import the modules in Python.

> Build using conda

Author: @Alexsandruss Please review this part thoroughly and feel free to modify if it's unclear or if it's missing something.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The |sklearnex| can also be easily built from source with a single command using ``conda-build``. 

Requirements
************

The following are required in order to use ``conda-build``:

- Any ``conda`` distribution (`Miniforge <https://github.com/conda-forge/miniforge>`__ is recommended).
- ``conda-build`` and ``conda-verify`` packages installed in a conda environment:

    .. code-block:: bash

        conda install -c conda-forge conda-build conda-verify

- On Windows*, an **external** installation of the MSVC compiler **version 2022** is required by default. Other versions can be specified in `conda-recipe/conda_build_config.yaml <https://github.com/uxlfoundation/scikit-learn-intelex/blob/main/conda-recipe/conda_build_config.yaml>`__ if needed.
- Optionally, for DPC++ (GPU) support on Windows*, environment variable ``%DPCPPROOT%`` must be set to point to the DPC++ compiler path.

Instructions
************

To create and verify the conda package for this library, execute the following command from the root of the repository:

.. code-block:: bash

>     conda build .

Author: I gave it a try and it doesn't work. There seems to be some problem with the recipe - it throws this error on a python3.13 environment:
```
Could not solve for environment specs
The following packages are incompatible
├─ numpy =1.26 * is installable with the potential options
│  ├─ numpy [1.26.0|1.26.2|1.26.3|1.26.4] would require
│  │  └─ python_abi ==3.9 *_pypy39_pp73, which requires
│  │     └─ python =3.9 *_73_pypy, which can be installed;
│  ├─ numpy [1.26.0|1.26.2|1.26.3|1.26.4] would require
│  │  └─ python >=3.10,<3.11.0a0 *, which can be installed;
│  ├─ numpy [1.26.0|1.26.2|1.26.3|1.26.4] would require
│  │  └─ python >=3.11,<3.12.0a0 *, which can be installed;
│  ├─ numpy [1.26.0|1.26.2|1.26.3|1.26.4] would require
│  │  └─ python_abi =3.12 *_cp312, which requires
│  │     └─ python =3.12 *_cpython, which can be installed;
│  └─ numpy [1.26.0|1.26.2|1.26.3|1.26.4] would require
│     └─ python >=3.9,<3.10.0a0 *, which can be installed;
└─ python =3.13 * is not installable because it conflicts with any installable versions previously reported.
```

>     conda build .

Reviewer: Should we remove this section then?

>     conda build .

Author: I think we should fix it, since it is supposed to work and is used in one of the CI jobs. Which uses an older python version and thus doesn't fail btw.

The setup script accepts many configurable options, some controllable through environment variables and others controllable through command line arguments. For example:

.. code-block:: bash

    NO_DIST=1 python setup.py build_ext --inplace --force --abs-rpath

Additionally, the tools used by the build backend can also be passed custom configurations through environment variables such as ``$CXX``, ``$CXXFLAGS``, ``$LDFLAGS``, etc. For example:

.. code-block:: bash

    NO_DIST=1 LDFLAGS="-fuse-ld=lld" python setup.py build --using-lld

Environment variables
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following environment variables can be used to control setup aspects:

- ``SKLEARNEX_VERSION``: sets the package version.
- ``DALROOT``: sets the |onedal| path.
- ``MPIROOT``: sets the path to the MPI library. If this variable is not set but ``I_MPI_ROOT`` is found, will use ``I_MPI_ROOT`` instead. Not used when using ``NO_DIST=1``.
- ``NO_DIST``: set to '1', 'yes' or alike to build without support for distributed mode.
- ``NO_STREAM``: set to '1', 'yes' or alike to build without support for streaming mode.
- ``NO_DPC``: set to '1', 'yes' or alike to build without support of oneDAL DPC++ interfaces.

> - ``OFF_ONEDAL_IFACE``: set to '1' to build without the support of oneDAL interfaces.

Reviewer 2: Does it make sense at all?

- ``--debug``: builds modules with debugging symbols and assertions enabled. Note that on Windows*, this will only add debugging symbols for the ``_onedal_py`` extension modules, but not for the ``daal4py`` extension module.
- ``--using-lld`` (Linux*-only): makes the setup script avoid passing arguments that are not supported by LLVM's LLD linker, such as strong stack protection. This flag is required when building with the LLD linker (which can be achieved by setting environment variable ``$LDFLAGS="-fuse-ld=lld"``), but note that it **does not make the build script use LLD**, only avoids adding arguments that it doesn't support.

Apart from these, standard arguments recognized by the build libraries can also be passed in the same call - for example, to install without checking for dependencies:

.. code-block:: bash

    python setup.py install --single-version-externally-managed --record=record.txt
    python setup.py develop --no-deps

Tips
----

Incremental Compilation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The compiled modules are a mixture of Cython and PyBind11. Compilation of the PyBind11 modules is managed through CMake, which offers incremental compilation and parallel compilation, but compilation of the Cython module ``daal4py`` is managed through ``setuptools``, which lacks this feature, and in addition, is compiled under a single thread due to consisting of a single large file. Thus, by default, a call to ``python setup.py build`` can take a long time to finish, with most of that time spent in the single-threaded ``daal4py`` compilation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The compiled modules are a mixture of Cython and PyBind11. Compilation of the PyBind11 modules is managed through CMake, which offers incremental compilation and parallel compilation, but compilation of the Cython module ``daal4py`` is managed through ``setuptools``, which lacks this feature, and in addition, is compiled under a single thread as it consists of a single large file. Thus, by default, a call to ``python setup.py build`` can take a long time to finish, with most of that time spent in the single-threaded ``daal4py`` compilation.
```

For local development, in order to speed up setup, one can instead use ``ccache`` in order to avoid recompiling ``daal4py`` modules throughout multiple calls to ``setup.py``. While the build script doesn't have any explicit option for ``ccache``, it can be configured to use it by setting the compiler to something that would execute under it. Example:

.. code-block:: bash

    CC="ccache icx" CXX="ccache icpx" python setup.py build_ext --inplace --force
    CC="ccache icx" CXX="ccache icpx" python setup.py build

> Leave components out

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Omitting components
```

    NO_DPC=1 NO_DIST=1 CC="ccache icx -O0" CXX="ccache icpx -O0" LDFLAGS="-fuse-ld=lld" \
        python setup.py build --abs-rpath --using-lld

Cleaning the build folder
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When building from source, temporary artifacts are created under a ``/build`` folder. Since some modules use CMake, which is designed for incremental compilation, it will leave pre-compiled objects that it will try to reuse if further builds are executed without modifying the same input files.

However, note that CMake's logic does not consider compatibility of these leftover objects, so for example, if one first compiles the library with a given Python version, and then tries to compile it from the same folder using a different Python version, the leftover artifacts will be incompatible, but CMake will still try to reuse them and fail in the process, with a non-informative error message. Same issue might happen for example if some modules are enabled or disabled across different calls to the ``setup.py`` script.

If experiencing issues during compilation, try removing the existing ``/build`` folder to see if it solve the issues:

.. code-block:: bash

>     rm -Rf build

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    rm -rf build
```

Author: These are not the same thing on every shell.

> TBB runtimes

Reviewer 2: Should it be oneTBB?
